In the last video we show how the problem
of dividing a set of observations
into clusters can be formulated
as an optimization model.
Finding an optimum solution to
the problem is complicated and
requires quite a bit of
computational effort.
Think about this, in the example that
we introduced in the previous video,
we had data on 300 customers
of an online retailer.
The full optimization problem
would amount to searching for
the best way of partitioning 300
objects into 3 none-empty subsets.
The number of choices is astronomical.
So, instead of solving that problem,
we simplify it by reducing
the number of decisions to three.
In this reviews model we
just needed to search for
three customers that were used
as the centers of the clusters.
Even with this simplification the number
of choices is over 4.4 million.
This is quite large for a problem
with relatively few observations.
The bottom line is that the optimization
approach has some severe limitations for
large datasets.
And this is why approximation methods
such as hierarchical clustering and
K-means have become the most common
procedures for cluster analysis.
XLMiner includes both of these methods.
If you are working toward
the completion of this Introduction to
Business Analytics Specialization,
you have already used XLMiner
in the second course and
you should be fairly familiar with
either the Windows or the cloud version.
If for some reason you have not used
XLMiner then you should first watch
the video Introduction to
the Analytic Solver Platform.
In that video you will learn how to
access the cloud version of the ASP,
that's the Analytic Solver Platform, or
to download the Excel
version onto your computer.
So comeback here when you're ready to
learn how to use XLMiner for clustering.
Let's start by opening the Excel
file Market Segmentation- XLMiner.
The file contains the same data
that we used in the previous video.
Recall that the data consists of
demographic and purchasing metrics for
300 clients for an online retailer.
The retailer wants to use cluster analysis
to identify three market segments.
Highlight the data table which
is in the range from A3 to E303,
click on the XLMiner tab and
go to the Data Analysis group of tools.
Click on Cluster and
then choose K-Means Clustering.
The data range box should
show the range A3 to E303.
The number of rows should be 300 and
the number of columns should be 5.
Note that since we highlighted row three
which contains the names of the variables,
the first row contains header
box should be checked.
The variables in the input data box should
list all the variables in our dataset.
Let's highlight all the variables
except customer and
click on the arrow in
the middle of the window.
This action transfers the variables
to the selected variables box.
We now click on Next.
XLMiner offers a few choices to
execute the K-mean algorithm.
First we can select whether or
not to use normalized values.
We have already discussed
the advantage of normalized values
in order to interpret results.
So we will check
the Normalize Input data box.
Next we need to choose
the number of clusters.
In this case, we want to find
a solution with 3 clusters.
The number of iterations relates to
the number of times that the procedure
is going to adjust this entrance.
We will use the default value of 10.
In the options area, XLMiner allows you
to restart the K-Means procedure multiple
times, and we can also adjust the seed for
the random number generator.
We will leave the default values,
that is we will use a Fixed start and
a seed of 12345.
Click on Next and
move to the Output Options.
We will leave both boxes checked and
click on Finish.
XLMiner creates two worksheets,
one named KMC_Output and
another one named KMC_Clusters.
Let us start by examining
the output worksheet.
We scroll down to
the cluster center section.
The original coordinates and
the normalized coordinate tables,
show the centroids of the three clusters
that the K-means procedure found.
To compare to what we found
in the previous video
let's take a look at
the normalized centroids.
We can see that the first cluster seems to
be the one that we previously identified
as families, with normalized values around
0 except for the Number of Dependents.
The second cluster is the one that
we identified as professionals.
The group members have fairly high income,
they purchase frequently, and
they spend more money than the average.
The last cluster is the one that we
labeled as students, because the group
is at least one standard should
below the average in all attributes.
The results obtained by running
the K-Means method on XLMiner match
what we generated by solving
the optimization model using Solver.
The clusters are not exactly the same,
but they lead to the same conclusions.
The KMC_Cluster worksheet contains
the assignment of customers to clusters,
and the distances from
customers to each cluster.
This information could be used to
compare the membership of each cluster
between the solution that we found with
the Solver in the previous video and
the solution that we just
found with the XLMiner.
If we run the hierarchical clustering
tool, we obtain similar results.
You might want to try this on your own.
However, I must warn you that
the hierarchical clustering tool
in the XLMiner does not report
the centroids of the clusters.
They had to be calculated
from the cluster assignments.
So comparing the K-Means solutions with
the hierarchical clustering solution
requires a little bit of extra work.
As you can see finding clusters using
the XLMiner is straight forward.
However, before we go we need to address
the question of how many clusters to
use in a cluster analysis.
There is basically no theory about how
to find the right number of clusters.
In fact in some settings it might not be
completely clear what the right number
of cluster means.
We know that the two streams are to
either put every observation
in its own cluster or to put all
observations in a single cluster.
The first option we have
no predictive power,
because we will not have a cluster
where to put a new observation.
The second option results
in a trivial amount
that tells us nothing
about new observations.
Most analysts would that agree with
applying parsimony to cluster analysis.
Under this principle,
we choose the smallest number of clusters
that generalize best to a new observation.
There are a few ways in which
generalization could be measured.
For instance, we could measure how
much the centroids will move if we
re-run the clustering method
with the addition of new data.
We could also measure how
much the cluster assignments
would change in the presence of new data.
Or, we could also check how much
the total sum of squares would
change when assigning new
data to the existing cluster.
In addition to these measures,
we can also use a procedure where
we start with a small number of clusters
and then we add one cluster at a time.
After each addition, we decide
whether the new clusters have a more
meaningful interpretation than
the clusters in the previous iteration.
Let's try this approach on
our online retailer example.
At the moment we have
a solution with three clusters.
We have interpreted three clusters and
determined that there
are three identifiable markets, namely
families, professionals and students.
If we use XLMiner to re-run K-means to
find a solution with four clusters,
we find the normalized
centroids shown in this table.
The first cluster is the one
corresponding to families,
the second cluster corresponds to
what we labeled as professionals.
So far nothing new has emerged compared
to our solution with three clusters.
In fact, the centers for
clusters 1 and 2 in this solution
are identical to the centers of cluster
1 and 2 in the solution with 3 clusters.
Now we examine clusters 3 and
4 and we observe that they
are nearly identical to each other.
We compare the data summary tables for
the solution with three clusters and
the solution with four clusters.
We can now clearly see what has happened.
Because we want a solution
with four clusters,
we forced the third cluster in the
solution with three clusters to be split.
The 100 observations in this
cluster were split into 49 and
51 when we asked K-means to produce
a solution with four cluster.
For this analysis it
seems clear that the data
do not support the hypothesis of
the existence of a fourth market.
The right number of clusters in
this case seems to be three.
The goal of this module was to provide
you with that good understanding of what
cluster analysis is,
how this analysis is used in business and
how the analysis is performed.
You're now ready to apply this knowledge
and the tools that we have discussed.
The assignment at the end of this module
is a good as starting point to put cluster
analysis into action.